---
id: big_brother_and_us
title: Big brother and us
level: "3"
color:
parent: emergence_of_large-scale_harmony
connections:
last_updated: 2025-10-22
---
Mankind seeked organisation and proliferation since they emerged on this planet. For long they hunted and cultivated alongside each other, while the fraternity in that wilderness prepared them for further building of community. They needed a figure to look at, to ignore and to subordinate towards. To relinquish the burden of many, one would dictate the road for the rest, and thus emerged power on earth. The one or the handful few, representing the primitive community, clearly foresaw the benefit of it, for it’s easier to see one’s own recognition than a moral responsibility for the collective. Without the bound, and inhomogeneity, one cannot overpower any other, so they had to impose the benefit of one, at the expense of lifelong troubles to many. The recognition of power haunted humans through the recognition of self through those suppressants. Life harnessed its harmony in hierarchy, the one to put them in a line without a sound. Humans evolved and co-evolved their community from all the parts of the globe, and so came about the oppression; where the power and the people enabled the megalomaniac Big Brother to always exploit the unfairnesses possible, to keep the shackles tight, for he is bigger in power than any other.

History has always presented us with the evolution of all such human natures, the satirical status of state and the livelihood of oppressant. George Orwell’s dystopian masterpiece “1984” and Aldous Huxley’s “Brave New World” enlightens the world with the story of an ideal playground of a totalitarian oppressor, and the ideas mentioned within have never fallen short to be true in practice. Orwell was born as Eric Aurther Blair in Motihari, Bihar and one can dig in further author details in wikipedia, while we discuss what makes these novels crucial for all contemporality. But one disclaimer, not the details of the characters and turns in these literary works, but some universal concepts that have been introduced, will be shed light upon, simply in terms of what exactly happens around us now.

The Big Brother, a fictitious character in 1984 is just a symbol of the ostensible leader of Oceania, the totalitarian state ruled by the party Ingsoc (English Socialism), ‘for its own sake’ over the native inhabitants. Every citizen lives by constant surveillance of the authority, usually by telescreens with the ubiquitous fearful propaganda, ‘The Big Brother is watching you’. Although it is utterly impractical to imagine such a world to exist, it is actually more intriguing to mention, we indeed are just information sources of today’s big industries. We are all in all under heavy surveillance throughout, just the shackles are not so conspicuous. Extensive documentaries on how social media functions, reveals that the existence of companies that require adversary incomes, needs the consumers to feed onto the advertisements. Their policy is quite clever. Customise the customers; for now they will feed as they’ll be fed. The information retrieved by regular usages are just the source of user-details to these industries. Every social media click registers itself as the user, which in turn will form the recommendations, just to keep the customer hinged with the platform and it is true for any adversary media one can think of, like Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, and whatnot. The big brother should not be thought of as a character, but a force that drives global capitalism. He who thinks can bypass the algorithm only thickens the influence and entangles further.


The state advocates orthodoxes to participate and ideologicals to be eliminated, but to forcefully keep morality in between, they want contradictory ideas to coexist in a civilian mind. In the fictitious book The Theory and Practice in Oligarchical Collectivism in the Oceania, one finds - 

The keyword here is blackwhite. Like so many Newspeak words, this word has two mutually contradictory meanings. Applied to an opponent, it means the habit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of the plain facts. Applied to a Party member, it means a loyal willingness to say that black is white when Party discipline demands this. But it also means the ability to believe that black is white, and more, to know that black is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contrary. This demands a continuous alteration of the past, made possible by the system of thought which really embraces all the rest, and which is known in Newspeak and doublethink. Doublethink is basically the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one's mind simultaneously, and accepting both of them.

Newspeak, the artificial, minimalist language imposed to align the thoughts of the individuals with the principles of Ingsoc by stripping down English language to make any expression in contradiction to the morale of Ingsoc, literally impossible. The citizens thus are bound not to speak anything against the state as the only legal language illegitimises any such constructions. But he thinks beyond the scopes partitioned by the Big Brother, any ideologically and politically unorthodox thought, or maybe something contradictory to the tenets of Ingsoc would be considered as a ThoughtCriminal and such ideas are ThoughtCrimes. It is the idealisation of a governmental structure where simply democratic rights are abolished without questions. Do you remember that, ‘দুষ্টু লোক ভ্যানিশ’ comic by Prof. Ambikesh Mahapatra, back in 2012! It actually captures how Prof. Mahapatra commited the thoughtcrime which didi, as in ‘বাংলার Big Brother’ not at all liked and the consequences are known to all .

Huxley on the other hand, in Brave New World establishes the technological infrastructures of the state, to keep the civilians as subordinated as possible. Every aspect of civilian life is controlled by government agent-based technologies, where women’s ovaries are considered vestigial organs, and Hatchery Centre in London produces and farms newborns, and even fixes the intellectual and physical abilities to make sure of the social status of every human, from the very birth. The people receive the ration of Soma twice every day, a red pill to sublimate any intellectual or ideological thrust against the state. People are not in that sense oppressed as it appears from above, but deep down they aren’t humans anymore for their free act of choice is completely lacking any freedom insofar. Surprisingly it is true in all other cases, even the tea-garden workers get a psychedelic pill from their master at the end of every working day, to spill out their pleasure, just so that they don’t ask for further fulfilment of their rights. Our everyday inclination towards social media and reluctant pleasure in leisure are just another moral manifestation of that Soma as Huxley said.

Recent Russia-Ukraine scenario sheds light on this matter from another direction. On the third day, 23rd of February when Kiev started to get bombarded by missiles after missiles, Misha Kasturin, a software engineer in Ukraine, from Russia, calls his father to share the trauma and grief he’s facing with his family. Upon telling what’s happening, Kasturin the senior absolutely disbelieves his son. He was dogmatised by the Russian media, that the military actions are solely to keep Ukraine out of Nazist troubles, and they are helping out the citizens to evacuate the cities, along with distributing foods and medicines. Not onces did they mention about the war they are doing. Russian post-Kremlin media, the media under the state lied to the 14.4 crores of its population, about their unmindful act of imperialism. It was released globally through a website fatherbelieve.com which of course is obliterated now. Later on in protests within Russia, people and protagonists were prisoned due to their anti-state act, just the punishment of thoughtcrime. The novels are not just fictitious literary works, but the ideal extent of how far totalitarianism might manifest itself, be it through imposed power or pleasurous indoctrination are what concerned those authors. But beware of the time when the state shakes hands with the capital-driven industrialists, they’re not only easing the surveillance, but also Soma-rising the civilians. So, either rebel or become an ignorable gravel.