---
id: classicality_and_the_principle_of_sufficient_reason
title: Classicality and hte principle of suffficient reason
level: "3"
color:
parent: fundamental_principles_of_physics
connections:
last_updated: 2025-10-22
---
 prolonged discussion about what happened today needs more sittings for it was extensive over many degrees of freedom. Assuming the core discourse to be coherent enough, the substance of today’s constrained-association is followed down beneath.

The distinction between phenomenon and noumenon as Kant advocated carries the essence that, inherently within the phenomenal episteme the only possibility is to have some representation of the noumenon, but the thing as it is, is fundamentally vacuous within our perceptual universe. It requires rather many presuppositions to establish such structure of cognition from the pov of natural externality but that is conceptually establishable without any a-priori suppositions from the pov of transcended episteme (of the subject), i.e. the conscious apparatuses, you and me. Such apriori suppositions can be emergent nature of the subject itself, but the idiosyncrasy of natural science fails to capture the essence of it, to even its basic properties. So the transcendence from absolute transcendental idealism is necessary to capture the co-existence of both idea and matter (this statement is necessary to further establish the idea of noumenon behind the phenomenon as opposed to the pure idealisation of noumenon as the thing as it exists irrespective of the subject). They aren’t mutually exclusive but jointly exhaustive, analogical (maybe to a deeper sense even) to how the principle of noncontradiction and the principle of excluded middle is related.


It is evident from empirical knowledge that the instances of perception or thought are real only in the exclusive space of possibilities, immanent to the subject, but the fact that it has transcended, doesn’t provide us any knowledge of how it can possibly be represented within our subjective reality. But how do we even make sense of the thing that is just in front of our eyes, or our surfaced-epicurean instances ? If we at all can infer anything truly in one way or the other, the noumenon must partake a very crucial role in our phenomenon, so as Locke would state to know about something I know not what, the Kantian demarcation is strictly an ontology to incorporate independence of perceptual (phenomenal/subjective) universe w.r.t. the physical world; just as clear disparity between poetic reality (where unicorns and ghosts are equally real - something I believe in myself to be real) and physical reality (which is constrained by analytic apriori laws - something I know from others to be real). The fact that conscious observers share the physical reality, binds us to have similar preconceptions, over which we conceive the present sense. So the acknowledgement from others is just another form of empirical verification here; in the same way how ORCH OR is invalidated simply because it isn’t consistent with experiments, where the other is the nature. So the noumenon we extrapolate from our sensory and intuitional inference is not what is out there, bare naked physical thing, but the noumenon behind the phenomenon we (even the apparatus in the stern-gerlach experiment, or any Zurek-ian/Tegmark-ian observer) experience(s).


Somehow that Dirac’s reference rings in my ears now that - poetry (or any subject-sensitive semiotic form) is a something known by everybody, said in a structure that nobody (but the producer or the subject) can make sense of, in contrary to science where one says about something known by nobody in a structure that everybody understands. But by affirming the distinction between ideal reality (maybe in poetic, literal sense) and material reality (simply in natural sense), what is being affirmed underneath is that any form of idealisation itself causally originates from material existence and then the idea of the matter stipulates the matter of the idea. These follow from the description of logic of nature and nature of logic, but I will elaborate this direction someplace else.


